Background: The relative contribution of mutational processes to the mutation toll of a cancer genome is often studied through the proxy of mutational signature exposures. Although they have been shown to be of use in patient stratification and understanding the aetiology of tumours, the methods to analyse these quantities have often been inadequate. Precisely because they are relative quantities - compositional data - the statistical methods to analyse them have to be amenable to their characteristics of non-negativity and total sum constraint. Moreover, these data have often been incorrectly analysed in a univariate setting.

Approach: To address these challenges, I show how methods for latently compositional data related to the multinomial distribution can be used in the context of regression to model the mutational landscape of tumours. I use a mixed effects Dirichlet-Multinomial model, which captures well the variety of correlations between mutational processes, and which allows for overdispersion, which we expect to find in analysing tumours sequenced in bulk.

Results: I show how the relative activity of mutational processes changes over time from early (clonal) to late (subclonal) mutations, in a pan-cancer analysis of whole genome sequences (PCAWG) of 29 cancer subtypes. My results show that, besides exogenous mutational processes, there are coordinated shifts in activity in endogenous or lesser-studied mutational signatures in several cancer types, including hepatocellular carcinoma, pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and prostate cancer, and I compare the results to the simpler regression case in which only the nucleotide change is considered. As the analyses must remain in relative space, I use methods suitable for compositional data to determine the signatures likely to drive the temporal shift, including some for which the underlying process is unknown.

Outlook: This methodology opens new avenues to understand mutational process dynamics, and is readily applicable to numerous other cases of multivariate count data.